
Explanation emailed to Marti, that might be useful for others someday.

The acronym OCEAN makes it easy to remember the Big Five Factors:

    Openness
    Conscientiousness
    Extraversion
    Agreeableness and
    Neuroticism

For historical reasons, they appear in a different sequence in the score: originally their focus was on problems, so Neuroticism is first.  Almost all of these personality assessments have Extraversion, so that was a big one at first as well.  An early questionnaire added Openness, which gave them NEO-Personality Inventory or NEO-PI.

Agreeableness and Conscientiousness came some time later, and they're "represented" by the "R" for Revised in the NEO-PI-R, which is the "gold standard" for Big Five/Five Factor Model assessments.  It costs about $80 to take that one, but the one I am using is an open source version that I can use for free.  The open source free version is one of many questionnaires available on the International Personality Item Pool (IPIP) site, https://ipip.ori.org/ .

Each of these five factors has six facets, making a total of 30 traits.  That's probably one thing that's confusing.  So the 300 items questionnaire has 10 items for each trait.

The facets for the NEO-PI-R are slightly different from the facets in the open source IPIP version.  I just think it's cool to match them up, so I put both of them in the score tables.

The OCEAN Factors and the six NEO-PI-R facets for each of them appear in the first column of the table, and the six IPIP facets for each factor appear in the second column of the table. 

One of the things that makes the FFM better than the Jungian questionnaire is that these traits really require no "translation."  So these first two columns should be self-explanatory.

The third column, the Raw score, is pretty much irrelevant.  That's another thing that might be confusing, but I keep it because there's a slight chance the program I eventually write might use the Raw score, I don't know.  It's easier to ignore it than to maybe have to add it later.

The score is really in the fourth column, Percentages.  These range from 0-100 percent, BUT they are relevant to the questionnaire, not the population as a whole.

If you are curious where you score relative to the population as a whole, we'd have to figure out how to get everyone to answer the questionnaire!  And lol good luck with that!!  If that doesn't make sense, it's a bit complicated, so I'd want to try to explain it on a call. 

The only questionnaire I found that shows you where you score relative to other people is the hexaco questionnaire at http://hexaco.org/ ,  and it's not a Big Five questionnaire per se.  It adds Honesty and so has six factors in all, and has some different facets, and is pretty cool, but there's a lot more information (books, etc.) available about the FFM. The wikipedia has some info about the HEXACO factors here: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HEXACO_model_of_personality_structure.  We can consider Honesty as being related to the Morality facet of Agreeableness.

The fifth column, Meaning, is something I added to help understand the results more easily.  Since 50% is not exactly in the middle of how the general population might score, I assigned a range to Average, A Little Low, A Little High, etc. scores.

I'm starting to think a person's most extreme score -- the highest or lowest, the closest to 100% or 0% -- is like their Super Power!  Depending on how extreme your personality is, these will have either "Very Low" or "Very High" in the Meaning column.

So your "Super Power" would be the Dutifulness facet of Conscientiousness, because you got 85% on that one.  Runners-up for your Super Power would be the Feelings/Emotionalism and Values/Liberalism facets under Openness, because you got 80% on those.  Your other scores are all closer to Average, 50%.

My Super Power is the Ideas/Intellect facet of Openness, because I scored 92% on that one.  In general my scores are pretty extreme, which explains why I sometimes feel like I'm on the wrong planet -- and why I feel compelled to work on this project.  I also have very high Straightforwardness/Morality (under Agreeableness) and Dutifulness (under Conscientiousness).

Very Low scores can also indicate a "Super Power."  A good example is Donald Trump.  His base loves him because he is unapologetic and doesn't care what people think.  His score at https://github.com/tomwhartung/five_factor_model/blob/master/results/real/politicians/donald_trump-ipip-300_items-NEO-i_say-score_values.csv reflects that: his most extreme scores are on the Compliance/Cooperation facet (just 2%!) and Modesty/Humility (5%!) facet of Agreeableness.

FYI when I posted that DJT was very low in Agreeableness (just 14% for all of the facets!) on Fb, Johnny Martin commented that I was "very funny."  After thinking about that, and some of the messages he'd sent me (e.g., about birtherism) for a few days, I decided he had to go, so I deleted and blocked him from my Fb.

I'm curious why you and he are no longer friends on Fb?

Anyway, I hope that helps!  If not, let me know and I'll try again!

Thanks again!

