
Why the MBTI Is Like the Fox News of Personality Assessments
Hi, my name is Tom Hartung and my mission in life is to help people see past the surface by drawing images of personalities. 
Self-portrait of the author's personality [INFP] from 1987As you can see from this self-portrait from 1987, I've been doing this for a long time. So far I've based my images on a personality assessment similar to the MBTI (r) - the Blue represents iNtuition, the Green represents Thinking, the Red represents Feeling, and the Yellow represents Sensation - but recently I've decided to change up.
This article explains a major one of the many reasons why.
The MBTI
The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator or MBTI (r) is an extremely popular personality assessment. Its basis is the theory of personality archetypes Carl Jung describes in his foundational work General Description of the Types, first published in German in 1921 and translated into English in 1923.
The MBTI is an extremely popular personality assessment. Searching for the #mbti hastag, or four-letter hashtags like #enfj or #istp on social networking sites like twitter, pinterest, and tumblr can easily yield thousands of results.
In the 1920s Katherine Briggs and her daughter Isabel Briggs Myers developed an interest in personalities in general and Carl Jung's work in particular. In the 1940s and 1950s they developed their questionnaire, which builds on Jung's theories to separate people into one of sixteen personality types.
There is a great deal of information about these sixteen types online, so I see no reason to describe them here.
Reality Check
Of course there are many ways in which the MBTI (r) is obviously different from Fox News! One is a personality assessment, the other a news outlet! Duh! 
And before going any further, I want to make it clear that I  do not by any means wish to denigrate Carl Jung's insights or the work of the Myer's-Briggs family.
Also, as an unaffiliated voter who has never belonged to either major political party, I try my darnedest to respect and admire all politicians and journalists!
Rather than dis any Very Fine People on any and all sides, the goal of this article is to highlight one similarity between the MBTI and Fox and offer an alternative to the MBTI-colored glasses many of us wear.
How the MBTI Is Like the Fox News of Personality Tests
The MBTI (r) and Fox News are similar in that they divide people. 
Not everyone is either-this-or-that. Some people are in or close to the middle - and this is super-important!
The similarity became evident recently when I was on quora reading Melinda Potter's enlightening response to the question 'If you believe Fox news is "fake news", did you form your opinion by actually watching different Fox programs or by what you are told by other people and what you have read?'
Quoting from Melinda's answer on quora.com:
It's an alternate universe on Fox. A happier, simpler, more black or white universe that many fans find comforting….
Not going to lie. There's a part of me that wishes to still be able to live in that littler, simple, happier, easier, and comforting little bubble I once enjoyed.
I feel strongly that, despite what we see in movies and on TV, people in real life are rarely if ever totally good or evil, but are instead somewhere in between.
The messy yet undeniable reality of this ambiguous morality makes the idea of good guys versus bad guys in movies and TV obsolete.
This applies to politics as well. As an unaffiliated voter, one reason I disdain social networking is because I dare not say anything positive about a conservative when commenting on a liberal's post, for fear of being taken for a cold, evil Republican. And I dare not post something positive about a Democrat when commenting on a Republican's post, for fear of being taken for a bleeding-heart liberal.
During divisive times like this, here in the Spring of 2020, I find it's best to just stay off line. If I constantly feel the need to stifle my opinion, why even visit the site?
Political neutrality is difficult for partisan types to accept, because their partisanship distorts their perceptions.
The way I see it, neither side is absolutely right or absolutely wrong, and our country requires both sides for balance.
Freeing Oneself From Plato's Cave
For another take on this idea, let's look inside Plato's Cave.
Quoting from "13. Sun, Line and Cave" in "Plato's Middle Period Metaphysics and Epistomology:"
Seated prisoners, chained so that they cannot move their heads, stare at a cave wall on which are projected images. These images are cast from carved figures illuminated by a fire and carried by people on a parapet above and behind the prisoners. A prisoner is loosed from his chains. First he sees the carved images and the fire. Then he is led out of the cave into 'the real' world. Blinded by the light of the sun, he cannot look at the trees, rocks and animals around him, but instead looks at the shadows and reflections (in water) cast by those objects. As he becomes acclimatized, he turns his gaze to those objects and finally, fully acclimatized, he looks to the source of illumination, the sun itself.
Clearly no one wants to be imprisoned in Plato's Cave, yet plenty of people prefer to embrace perception-distorting partisanship over a more realistic, non-partisan view. Not that there's anything wrong with that!
Similarly, many people prefer the black-and-white, two dimensional either-or divisiveness of the MBTI (r), when there is a better alternative.
Writing this in Denver, Colorado  in late May, 2020, I am beyond frustrated with the current political situation, so with respect to today's rabid partisanship, you're on your own. I mean I could recommend you search out differing points of view, but I doubt anyone would take my advice. Lol as if.
However, I do have an alternative to the MBTI that I would like to share.
Freeing Yourself From the MBTI
Since the late 1980s I have been using the results of a questionnaire called the
Keirsey Temperament Sorter or KTS - which gives results similar to the MBTI (r) - to draw images of personalities. The program I wrote uses the results of any questionnaire based on the Jungian Archetypes to produce an image, but I prefer the KTS.
An early self-portrait appears at the top of this article, and you can see hundreds of these colorful yet crude images on my web sites, artsyvisions.com, seeourminds.com, and groja.com.
This year I decided to step my game up and learn about the Big Five personality factors. The acronym "OCEAN" makes it easy to remember these key factors: Openness, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism.
Compared to Jungian Archetypes and the MBTI, the Five Factor Model is a real eye-opener! Technological advances since the 1920s have led researchers to pin point these five factors -which are just  words, really - as the minimum needed identify most of what constitutes a person's personality.
The idea behind these Big Five factors is similar to that behind the MBTI, and there is some correlation between the two. 
One of the biggest differences between them is the researchers behind the Big Five acknowledge these tendencies constitute not a dichotomy but a continuum. For example, rather than being always or even mostly Extraverted or Introverted, many if not most people are Ambiverts and have personalities someplace between the two extremes.
Rather than dive into these Five Factors here, I suggest that if you want to learn more, a great place to start is by taking a questionnaire. If you would like a guided tour of several sites that offer free versions of the Big Five Personality Test, check out my latest listicle, The Top Five Big Five Free Online Questionnaires.
My New Mission
Thus, I've decided to take on a new project: to convert my program that draws personalities using Jungian Archetypes to one that  uses the Big Five Factor Model. This will not be an easy task, and I am sure it will take me years to figure out how to do this, but I'm very excited about it!
Face it: helping others see past the surface is something we could all use in this day and age!
It's nice to have a difficult problem to solve and take my mind off the world, which here in the late Spring of 2020, seems to be kind of falling apart.
And as any MBTI aficionado knows, there's nothing an INFP loves more than a mission!
