
Why the MBTI (r) Is Like the Fox News of Personality Assessments

The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator or MBTI (r) is an extremely popular personality assessment.
It is based on the personality archetypes that Carl Jung described in his foundational work
General Description of the Types, https://psychclassics.yorku.ca/Jung/types.htm
first published in 1921 and translated into English in 1923.

The MBTI

The MBTI is an extremely popular personality assessment.
Searching for the #mbti hashtag, or four-letter hashtags like #infj or #estp on sites like twitter, pinterest, or tumblr yields thousands of results.

Katherine Briggs and later her daughter Isabel Briggs Myers had an interest in personalities in general and Carl Jung's work in particular.
In the 1940s and 1950s they developed their
questionnaire https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Myers%E2%80%93Briggs_Type_Indicator
Building on Jung's theories it separates people into one of 16 personality types.

Because a great deal of information is available about these
16 types online, https://www.google.com/search?q=mbti
I see no reason to describe them here.

Sanity Check

Of course there are many ways in which the MBTI is obviously different from Fox!

And I have no wish to denigrate Jung's insights or the work of the Myers-Briggs family.

I only want to point out that, when it comes to personality assessments, there is now a better alternative.

Why the MBTI (r) Is Like Fox News

The MBTI and Fox News are similar in that they divide people.

This article examines this similarity, and suggests an alternative personality assessment: the Big Five "OCEAN" traits.

The similarity hit me when I was reading Melinda Potter's enlightening response to the question
"If you believe Fox news is "fake news", did you form your opinion by actually watching different Fox programs or by what you are told by other people and what you have read?"
https://www.quora.com/If-you-believe-Fox-news-is-fake-news-did-you-form-your-opinion-by-actually-watching-different-Fox-programs-or-by-what-you-are-told-by-other-people-and-what-you-have-read
The light came on when I read the following, which appears towards the end of Melinda's answer:

[start quote]
It’s an alternate universe on Fox. A happier, simpler, more black or white universe that many fans find comforting.
[end quote]

Now, despite what we see in movies and on TV, people in real life are rarely totally good or evil, but are rather somewhere in between.
The undeniable reality of this **ambiguous morality** makes the idea of good guys versus bad guys in movies and TV obsolete.

This applies to politics as well.
As an unaffiliated voter, I dare not say anything positive about a conservative when commenting on a liberal's post,
for fear of being taken for a conservative.
The same is true about posting something positive about a Democrat when commenting on a Republican's post, for fear of being taken for a Democrat.

[Key point]
Political neutrality is difficult for partisan types to accept, because their partisanship distorts their perceptions.
[End key point]

Neither side is absolutely right or absolutely wrong, but our country requires both sides for balance.

Freeing Oneself From Plato's Cave

To drive the point home, let's look inside
Plato's Cave. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Allegory_of_the_cave

[start quote]
Seated prisoners, chained so that they cannot move their heads, stare at a cave wall on which are projected images. These images are cast from carved figures illuminated by a fire and carried by people on a parapet above and behind the prisoners. A prisoner is loosed from his chains. First he sees the carved images and the fire. Then he is led out of the cave into ‘the real’ world. Blinded by the light of the sun, he cannot look at the trees, rocks and animals around him, but instead looks at the shadows and reflections (in water) cast by those objects. As he becomes acclimatized, he turns his gaze to those objects and finally, fully acclimatized, he looks to the source of illumination, the sun itself.
From "13. Sun, Line and Cave" in
"Plato’s Middle Period Metaphysics and Epistemology" https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/plato-metaphysics/#13
[end quote]

Clearly no one wants to be imprisoned in Plato's Cave, yet plenty of people prefer embracing a partisan view to a more realistic, non-partisan view.

Similarly, many people prefer the black-and-white, two dimensional either-or divisiveness of the MBTI (r), when there is a better alternative.

Here in 2020, I am beyond frustrated with the current political situation, so you're on your own there.
I could recommend you search out differing points of view, but I doubt anyone would take my advice.

However, I do have an alternative to the MBTI that I would like to share.

Freeing Yourself From the MBTI (r)

Since the late 1980s I have been using the results of a questionnaire called the
Keirsey Temperament Sorter, https://keirsey.com/temperament-overview/
which is similar to the MBTI, to draw images of personalities.
I have a program that uses the results of any questionnaire based on the Jungian Archetypes to produce an image.

You can see these colorful yet crude images on my sites,
artsyvisions.com https://www.artsyvisions.com/
seeourminds.com https://www.seeourminds.com/
and
groja.com https://www.groja.com/ .

This year I decided to step my game up and learn about the Big Five personality factors.
The acronym "OCEAN" makes it easy to remember these key factors: Openness, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism.

Compared to the MBTI (r), the Five Factor Model is a real eye-opener.
It's just like getting out of Plato's Cave, switching from old school cops-and-robbers movies to Film Noir, and
realizing both Republicans and Democrats are full of it!

Technological advances since the 1920s have led researchers to identify five factors - words, really - that identify
most of what constitutes a person's personality.

The idea behind these Big Five factors is similar to that behind the MBTI (r).
However, the biggest difference between them is the researchers acknowledge these tendencies constitute a continuum.
Most people lie someplace in the middle - are Ambiverts, for example, rather than always or even mostly Extraverted or Introverted.

I don't want to dive into these Five Factors here.
The goal of this article is to simply draw these

I score very high on Openness, and this is what Open people do: find parallels between things that other, more Closed people tend to miss.

My Mission

Thus, I have a new progect: to convert my personality-visualizing program from using Jungian Archetypes to using the Five Factor Model.

This will not be an easy task, and I am sure it will take me years to figure out how to do this.

[Bold]
Face it: helping others see past the surface is something we could all use in this day and age!
[Unbold]

It's nice to have a difficult problem to solve and take my mind off the world, which here in the late spring of 2020, seems to be falling apart.

And as any MBTI (r) aficionado knows, there's nothing an INFP loves more than a mission!

